Matthew's Sunday Chicken

Ingredients:

1 roasting chicken (3-4 lbs)
1/2 cup sugar
1/2 cup salt
1/2 cup soy sauce
2 tbsp butter
1 tsp sage or other dried herbs

I. BRINE

Up to 24 hours before you want to serve it, start brining the chicken. Fill a
large stockpot about 1/2 full with warm water. Stir in the sugar, salt, and soy
sauce until dissolved. Remove any giblets and place the whole chicken in the
pot. Refrigerate. The longer you brine, the better.

Remove the chicken from the brine 2 hours before you want to serve, pat dry,
and let rest at room temperature for 30 minutes.

II. ROAST

Preheat oven to 450. Melt the butter in a small bowl or ramekin, and stir in
the dried herbs. Work the skin away from the breast and rub half of the melted
herb butter under the skin of the breast. Brush the outer surface of the skin
with the rest of the butter.

Place chicken in a small roasting pan (the kind with the slits for fat to drip
through) and stick a thermometer (if you have one) in the thickest part of the
breast. Place chicken in the oven, reduce heat to 425, and turn your oven to
convection if you can. Roast until thermometer reads 170 degrees (15-20 min
per pound).

Remove chicken from oven, cover with aluminum foil, and let rest for at least
10 minutes.

III. (OPTIONAL) MAKE GRAVY

Pour the drippings from the bottom of the roasting pan into a separator, then
pour the juices only into a small saucepan (a tiny bit of fat is ok). Whisk in
about 1-2 tsp of flour and cook over medium-low heat, stirring constantly until
it thickens (about 3-4 minutes). You won't regret it.

IV. CARVE AND EAT

Eat the wings immediately. What you do with the wing bones is none of my
business.

I like to cut away the entire breast in one piece, then slice it crosswise into
6 or so slices and serve with the drumsticks and however much of the thigh meat
you want to eat. Serve with the gravy.

When cool (after dinner), pull off the rest of the meat, put the carcass in the
stockpot, cover with water, and simmer for a few hours to make stock for
tomorrow's soup.

